README: Add a section on how to determine the touchscreen parameters (#233)
onitake/gsl-firmware: README.md

integrator did not anticipate any uses cases outside the device vendor's
ecosystems. For this reason, it is required to pass additional
device parameters to the driver that are neither contained in the firmware
nor in the ACPI DSDT. silead_ts handles this in the kernel, using a DMI
quirk table. gslx680_ts_acpi expects firmware in its own format which contains
this information.

silead_ts allows passing the device parameters on the kernel commandline
to test on devices which are not yet in the DMI quirk table. This is supported
in kernel 6.10 and later, for older kernels the kernel needs to be patched

> and build [(*)](kernel-recompile-debian.md) to test parameter changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and rebuilt [(*)](kernel-recompile-debian.md) to test parameter changes.
```

Reviewer: I think you should also replace the `(*)` with a link description. Clicking `(*)` is hard on a small screen and has other accessibility issues. Something like `[see kernel-recompile-debian.md for Debian-specific instructions]`, or something shorter.

For older kernels testing is easier with gslx680_ts_acpi.

### Determining the touchscreen's parameters

#### 1. Extract the firmware from the factory OS

Before even installing Linux make sure you have extracted the firmware from
the original factory OS as described above. Silead firmwares are model specific,
so if the factory OS is wiped before retrieving the firmware then things will

> not work. In this case you may be able to download a factory OS image from
> the device's vendor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not work. In this case you may still be able to download a factory OS image from
the device vendor's website, but not all vendors offer this.
```

#### 2. Copying the firmware to /lib/firmare

> silead_ts, which should already be enabled in your distro's kernel, will print

Reviewer: ```suggestion
silead_ts, which should already be enabled in your Linux distribution's kernel, will print
```

`sudo rmmod silead; sudo modprobe silead` and then rerun
`sudo dmesg | grep silead` this should now show the touchscreen getting
registered in the form of a line containing `input: silead_ts as ...`.

#### 3. Testing you have the right firmware

Install evtest or evemu-record (evemu), although all examples below use
`evtest` using either the `evtest` or `evemu-record` command should work.

Run `sudo evtest`. This gives a list of `/dev/input/event#` devices.
Replace `#` in the commands below with the number of the `/dev/input/event#`
node for the `silead_ts` input device.

Run `sudo evtest /dev/input/event# | grep ABS_X` and then slowly run
your finger over the screen from the left edge of the screen to
the right edge along the middle line of the display and press Ctrl + C
to terminate evtest when done. This should print slowly increasing or
decreasing ABS_X values.

If instead the ABS_X values stay approx. the same then your X and Y axis are
swapped. Redo the test moving your finger over the screen from the top edge
of the screen to the bottom edge along the middle line of the display instead.

If there are big jumps or holes in the range, retry making sure your finger

> makes proper contact with the screen if that does not help then you have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
makes proper contact with the screen. If that doesn't help, then you have
```

values on the kernel commandline.

This requires the ACPI Hardware ID (HID) for the touchscreen. Run
`ls -d /sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-MSSL*`, this should output a single line
ending in e.g. `i2c-MSSL1680:00`. The ACPI HID of the touchscreen is the bit
after the `i2c-` and before the `:00` so `MSSL1680` in this case.

This HID is the first argument for the `i2c_touchscreen_props` kernel
commandline argument. To pass the found min/max values the following syntax
is used:

```
i2c_touchscreen_props=<ACPI_HW_ID>:touchscreen-min-x=<x-min>:touchscreen-min-y=<y-min>:touchscreen-size-x=<x-max + 1>:touchscreen-size-y=<y-max + 1>
```

So if for example in step 4. you have found values of x-min=8, y-min=8,
x-max=1919, y-max=1079 then the kernel commandline argument to pass would be:

```
i2c_touchscreen_props=MSSL1680:touchscreen-min-x=8:touchscreen-min-y=8:touchscreen-size-x=1920:touchscreen-size-y=1080
```

Edit your kernel configuration, e.g. `/boot/loader/entries/<current-kernel>.conf`,
add this to your kernel commandline then reboot to test. After reboot run
`sudo cat /proc/cmdline` to make sure that `i2c_touchscreen_props=...` is there
and is correct.

> 

Reviewer: I'd move this part after the next paragraph. You already mentioned how to detect swapped axes, so adding the correct flags should be straight-forward.

Author: > I'd move this part after the next paragraph. You already mentioned how to detect swapped axes, so adding the correct flags should be straight-forward.

I did the split of first testing with only min/max settings vs adding swapping deliberately. The text to test the axis talks about top/bottom and left/right edges. Depending on form factor users are likely to define which edges are top/bottom and what is left/right from e.g. holding the device in landscape orientation. But the actual LCD panel could be a portrait panel.

So even though the user swiped from top to bottom when testing the X-axis, which feels like swapping is needed, swapping might not be necessary (and actually would be wrong to do) because they were holding the LCD panel 90° rotated from its native panel orientation.

So I prefer to keep this as is and first have users test with only min/max values set.

to swap and invert the Y axis, you would then extend `i2c_touchscreen_props=`
by adding `:touchscreen-swapped-x-y:touchscreen-inverted-y` after the size-x
parameter, so you would get (abbreviated):

```
i2c_touchscreen_props=MSSL1680:touchscreen-min-x=...:touchscreen-size-y=1080:touchscreen-swapped-x-y:touchscreen-inverted-y
```

If one of the bezels around the display has a Windows logo chances are this
can operate as a capacitive home-button. To test this add `:silead,home-button`
after the existing `i2c_touchscreen_props=` parameters. After rebooting with
`:silead,home-button` added to the parameters run `sudo evtest /dev/input/event#`
and press the Windows logo if this reports `KEY_LEFTMETA` events then it works.

If this does not work drop `silead,home-button` from your parameters since this
may cause spurious `KEY_LEFTMETA` events when it is not supported.

The linux touchscreen framework also supports some other properties that
may be useful, see [touchscreen.yaml](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/devicetree/bindings/input/touchscreen/touchscreen.yaml)

> for a full list.

Reviewer: Do we need to mention how to determine the number of multi-touch points?
I believe we've seen devices with 5 and some with 10.

Author: Basically all but the very oldest Silead touchscreens only found on really cheap Allwinner A13 / A23 tablets can do 10 points. So I plan to submit a patch upstream to make 10 the default and drop all the boilerplate PROPERTY_ENTRY_U32("silead,max-fingers", 10) code from drivers/platform/x86/touchscreen_dmi.c I will submit a patch series for this upstream soon.
